<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="a-reminiscence-of-dr-samuel-johnson" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Reminiscence of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Humphry Littlewit, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</header>
			<p>The Privilege of Reminiscence, however rambling or tiresome, is one generally allow’d to the very aged; indeed, ’tis frequently by means of such Recollections that the obscure occurrences of History, and the lesser Anecdotes of the Great, are transmitted to Posterity.</p>
			<p>Tho’ many of my readers have at times observ’d and remark’d a Sort of antique Flow in my Stile of Writing, it hath pleased me to pass amongst the Members of this Generation as a young Man, giving out the Fiction that I was born in 1890, in <b>America</b>. I am now, however, resolv’d to unburthen myself of a secret which I have hitherto kept thro’ Dread of Incredulity; and to impart to the Publick a true knowledge of my long years, in order to gratifie their taste for authentick Information of an Age with whose famous Personages I was on familiar Terms. Be it then known that I was born on the family Estate in <b>Devonshire</b>, of the 10th day of August, 1690, (or in the new <b>Gregorian</b> Stile of Reckoning, the 20th of August) being therefore now in my 228th year. Coming early to <b>London</b>, I saw as a Child many of the celebrated Men of King <b>William’s</b> Reign, including the lamented <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Dryden</b>, who sat much at the Tables of <b>Will’s</b> Coffee-House. With <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Addison</b> and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Swift</b> I later became very well acquainted, and was an even more familiar Friend to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Pope</b>, whom I knew and respected till the Day of his Death. But since it is of my more recent Associate, the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, that I am at this time desir’d to write; I will pass over my Youth for the present.</p>
			<p>I had first Knowledge of the Doctor in May of the year 1738, tho’ I did not at that Time meet him. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Pope</b> had just compleated his Epilogue to his Satires, (the Piece beginning: “Not twice a Twelvemonth you appear in Print.”) and had arrang’d for its Publication. On the very Day it appear’d, there was also publish’d a Satire in Imitation of <b>Juvenal</b>, entituled “<b>London</b>,” by the then unknown <b>Johnson</b>; and this so struck the Town, that many Gentlemen of Taste declared, it was the Work of a greater Poet than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Pope</b>. Notwithstanding what some Detractors have said of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Pope’s</b> petty Jealousy, he gave the Verses of his new Rival no small Praise; and having learnt thro’ <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Richardson</b> who the Poet was, told me, “that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> wou’d soon be <b xml:lang="fr">deterre</b>.”</p>
			<p>I had no personal Acquaintances with the Doctor till 1763, when I was presented to him at the <b>Mitre</b> Tavern by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>James Boswell</b>, a young <b>Scotchman</b> of excellent Family and great Learning, but small Wit, whose metrical Effusions I had sometimes revis’d.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, as I beheld him, was a full, pursy Man, very ill drest, and of slovenly Aspect. I recall him to have worn a bushy Bob-Wig, untyed and without Powder, and much too small for his Head. His Cloaths were of rusty brown, much wrinkled, and with more than one Button missing. His Face, too full to be handsom, was likewise marred by the Effects of some scrofulous Disorder; and his Head was continually rolling about in a sort of convulsive way. Of this Infirmity, indeed, I had known before; having heard of it from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Pope</b>, who took the Trouble to make particular Inquiries.</p>
			<p>Being nearly seventy-three, full nineteen Years older than <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, (I say Doctor, tho’ his Degree came not till two Years afterward) I naturally expected him to have some Regard for my Age; and was therefore not in that Fear of him, which others confess’d. On my asking him what he thought of my favourable Notice of his Dictionary in <b>The Londoner</b>, my periodical Paper, he said: “Sir, I possess no Recollection of having perus’d your Paper, and have not a great Interest in the Opinions of the less thoughtful Part of Mankind.” Being more than a little piqued at the Incivility of one whose Celebrity made me solicitous of his Approbation, I ventur’d to retaliate in kind, and told him, I was surpris’d that a Man of Sense shou’d judge the Thoughtfulness of one whose Productions he admitted never having read. “Why, Sir,” reply’d <b>Johnson</b>, “I do not require to become familiar with a Man’s Writings in order to estimate the Superficiality of his Attainments, when he plainly shews it by his Eagerness to mention his own Productions in the first Question he puts to me.” Having thus become Friends, we convers’d on many Matters. When, to agree with him, I said I was distrustful of the Authenticity of <b>Ossian’s</b> Poems, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> said: “That, Sir, does not do your Understanding particular Credit; for what all the Town is sensible of, is no great Discovery for a <b>Grub-Street</b> Critick to make. You might as well say, you have a strong Suspicion that <b>Milton</b> wrote <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i>!”</p>
			<p>I thereafter saw <b>Johnson</b> very frequently, most often at Meetings of <b>The Literary Club</b>, which was founded the next Year by the Doctor, together with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Burke</b>, the parliamentary Orator, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Beauclerk</b>, a Gentleman of Fashion, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Langton</b>, a pious Man and Captain of Militia, Sir <b><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Reynolds</b>, the widely known Painter, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Goldsmith</b>, the Prose and poetick Writer, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Nugent</b>, father-in-law to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Burke</b>, Sir <b>John Hawkins</b>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Anthony Chamier</b>, and my self. We assembled generally at seven o’clock of an Evening, once a Week, at the <b>Turk’s-Head</b>, in <b>Gerrard-Street</b>, <b>Soho</b>, till that Tavern was sold and made into a private Dwelling; after which Event we mov’d our Gatherings successively to <b>Prince’s</b> in <b>Sackville-Street</b>, <b>Le Tellier’s</b> in <b>Dover-Street</b>, and <b>Parsloe’s</b> and the <b>Thatched House</b> in <b><abbr>St.</abbr> James’s-Street</b>. In these Meetings we preserv’d a remarkable Degree of Amity and Tranquillity, which contrasts very favourably with some of the Dissensions and Disruptions I observe in the literary and amateur Press Associations of today. This Tranquillity was the more remarkable, because we had amongst us Gentlemen of very opposed Opinions. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> and I, as well as many others, were high Tories; whilst <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Burke</b> was a Whig, and against the <b>American</b> War, many of his Speeches on that Subject having been widely publish’d. The least congenial Member was one of the Founders, Sir <b>John Hawkins</b>, who hath since written many misrepresentations of our Society. Sir <b>John</b>, an eccentrick Fellow, once declin’d to pay his part of the Reckoning for Supper, because ’twas his Custom at Home to eat no Supper. Later he insulted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Burke</b> in so intolerable a Manner, that we all took Pains to shew our Disapproval; after which Incident he came no more to our Meetings. However, he never openly fell out with the Doctor, and was the Executor of his Will; tho’ <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Boswell</b> and others have Reason to question the genuineness of his Attachment. Other and later Members of the <b>Club</b> were <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>David Garrick</b>, the Actor and early Friend of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, Messieurs <b><abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr></b> and <b><abbr class="name">Jos.</abbr> Warton</b>, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Adam Smith</b>, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Percy</b>, Author of the “Reliques,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Edw. Gibbon</b>, the Historian, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Burney</b>, the Musician, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Malone</b>, the Critick, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Boswell</b>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Garrick</b> obtain’d Admittance only with Difficulty; for the Doctor, notwithstanding his great Friendship, was for ever affecting to decry the Stage and all Things connected with it. <b>Johnson</b>, indeed, had a most singular Habit of speaking for <b>Davy</b> when others were against him, and of arguing against him, when others were for him. I have no Doubt but that he sincerely lov’d <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Garrick</b>, for he never alluded to him as he did to <b>Foote</b>, who was a very coarse Fellow despite his comick Genius. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Gibbon</b> was none too well lik’d, for he had an odious sneering Way which offended even those of us who most admir’d his historical Productions. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Goldsmith</b>, a little Man very vain of his Dress and very deficient in Brilliancy of Conversation, was my particular Favourite; since I was equally unable to shine in the Discourse. He was vastly jealous of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, tho’ none the less liking and respecting him. I remember that once a Foreigner, a <b>German</b>, I think, was in our Company; and that whilst <b>Goldsmith</b> was speaking, he observ’d the Doctor preparing to utter something. Unconsciously looking upon <b>Goldsmith</b> as a meer Encumbrance when compar’d to the greater Man, the Foreigner bluntly interrupted him and incurr’d his lasting Hostility by crying, “Hush, Toctor <b>Shonson</b> iss going to speak!”</p>
			<p>In this luminous Company I was tolerated more because of my Years than for my Wit or Learning; being no Match at all for the rest. My Friendship for the celebrated Monsieur <b>Voltaire</b> was ever a Cause of Annoyance to the Doctor; who was deeply orthodox, and who us’d to say of the <b>French</b> Philosopher: “<i xml:lang="la">Vir est acerrimi Ingenii et paucarum Literarum.</i>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <b>Boswell</b>, a little teazing Fellow whom I had known for some Time previously, us’d to make Sport of my aukward Manners and old-fashion’d Wig and Cloaths. Once coming in a little the worse for Wine (to which he was addicted) he endeavour’d to lampoon me by means of an Impromptu in verse, writ on the Surface of the Table; but lacking the Aid he usually had in his Composition, he made a bad grammatical Blunder. I told him, he shou’d not try to pasquinade the Source of his Poesy. At another Time <b>Bozzy</b> (as we us’d to call him) complain’d of my Harshness toward new Writers in the Articles I prepar’d for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Monthly Review</i>. He said, I push’d every Aspirant off the Slopes of Parnassus. “Sir,” I reply’d, “you are mistaken. They who lose their Hold do so from their own Want of Strength; but desiring to conceal their Weakness, they attribute the absence of Success to the first Critick that mentions them.” I am glad to recall that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> upheld me in this Matter.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> was second to no Man in the Pains he took to revise the bad Verses of others; indeed, ’tis said that in the book of poor blind old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <b>Williams</b>, there are scarce two lines which are not the Doctor’s. At one Time <b>Johnson</b> recited to me some lines by a Servant to the Duke of <b>Leeds</b>, which had so amus’d him, that he had got them by Heart. They are on the Duke’s Wedding, and so much resemble in Quality the Work of other and more recent poetick Dunces, that I cannot forbear copying them:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“When the Duke of <b>Leeds</b> shall marry’d be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a fine young Lady of high Quality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How happy will that Gentlewoman be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his Grace of <b>Leeds’</b> good Company.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I ask’d the Doctor, if he had ever try’d making Sense of this Piece; and upon his saying he had not, I amus’d myself with the following Amendment of it:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>When Gallant <b>Leeds</b> auspiciously shall wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The virtuous Fair, of antient Lineage bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How must the Maid rejoice with conscious Pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win so great an Husband to her Side!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>On shewing this to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b>, he said, “Sir, you have straightened out the Feet, but you have put neither Wit nor Poetry into the Lines.”</p>
			<p>It wou’d afford me Gratification to tell more of my Experiences with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <b>Johnson</b> and his circle of Wits; but I am an old Man, and easily fatigued. I seem to ramble along without much Logick or Continuity when I endeavour to recall the Past; and fear I light upon but few Incidents which others have not before discuss’d. Shou’d my present Recollections meet with Favour, I might later set down some further Anecdotes of old Times of which I am the only Survivor. I recall many Things of <b>Sam Johnson</b> and his Club, having kept up my Membership in the Latter long after the Doctor’s Death, at which I sincerely mourn’d. I remember how <b>John Burgoyne</b>, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, the General, whose Dramatick and Poetical Works were printed after his Death, was blackballed by three Votes; probably because of his unfortunate Defeat in the <b>American</b> War, at <b>Saratoga</b>. Poor <b>John</b>! His Son fared better, I think, and was made a Baronet. But I am very tired. I am old, very old; it is Time for my Afternoon Nap.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
